# 2_1

Run commands from this directory. For normal operation, run `make`.

## Flags

Run the following flags without the dash: `make w` for worst case.


`-w`: worst case
`-b`: best case
`-f`: failure during election
`-ff`: 2nd type of failure

The other 2 scenarios can be triggered during normal operation.
## Best/Worst case scenario

In the worst case, the election starts from node 0, who tries to bully nodes 1-9. Node 1 responds first, bullying 0 into submission and Node 1 tries to bully nodes 2-9, and so forth.

We simulate this by adding a delay to the handling of the election messages in the node listener, equivalent to the node id *100ms

We also stop the highest numbered node, 9, from immediately declaring itself victor.

In the best case, the election starts from the highest numbered node, 9, who sends victory messages immediately. We have the minimum number of messages.

We simulate this by only allowing node 9 to declare itself the victor. Unfortunately, if node 9 goes down hypothetically, then there will be no coordinator.

## Failure during election (A)

When n-1 node sending victory messages, we send a down command to the n-1 node. The result is the system appoints a new coordinator n-2.

## Failure during election (B)
When n-1 node sending victory messages, we send a down command to the n-2 node. The system works as per normal

## Multiple GO routines start the election process simultaneously

A close approximation already happens in normal operation, where each node is booted and launches the listener and Run() with `electing` as the starting  mode.

## Arbitrary node silently leaves the network
While running in normal mode, type `smite` into stdin to down a random node. The system will adjust accordingly if the coordinator is downed.